---
title: Documenting and Referencing Cryptographic Components in IETF Documents
abbrev: Crypto components
docname: draft-paulwh-crypto-components-05
ipr: trust200902
submissiontype: IETF
cat: info

author:
  -
    ins: P. Wouters
    name: Paul Wouters
    organization: Aiven
    email: paul.wouters@aiven.io
  -
    ins: P. Hoffman
    name: Paul Hoffman
    organization: ICANN
    email: paul.hoffman@icann.org

informative:
  RFC8179:
  RFC8789:
  RFC9371:
  I-D.ietf-dnsop-rfc8624-bis:

normative:
  RFC8126:

--- abstract

This document describes the history of how cryptographic components have been documented and referenced in the IETF,
such as in RFCs, Internet Drafts, and exernal sources.
It also gives guidance for how such specification should happen in the future.

%%
(To be removed before publication as an RFC)
This document is being developed in SAAG.
There is a git repo for the document at <https://github.com/paulehoffman/draft-paulwh-crypto-components>.
%%

--- middle

# Introduction

The IETF has many diverse ways to document and reference cryptographic components that are used in protocols. 
These practices have changed over time, based on the IETF community, the IETF leadership, and the types of components needed by protocols.

The purpose of this document is to increase consistency and transparency in how the IETF handles cryptographic components.
It provides input to IETF working groups that are defining new cryptographic components or updating the way they specify cryptographic components, such as in IANA registries.
This document does not define any new policies, but instead describes the many practices that have been used, particularly the practices that are considered best current practices today.

In this document, items such as cryptographic algorithms, base primitives, functions, methods, and constructions are all lumped under the term "cryptographic components".
Doing so avoids the conflicting definitions of what differentiates, for example, a method from a construction.

This document is informative, and thus does not prohibit exceptions from the current practices.
Given the wide variety of historical practices, the difficulty of differentiating what is a base primitive and what is a cryptographic component, and the variety of needs in IETF working groups, the guidance in this document gives leeway for future specifications.

# Referencing Cryptography in RFCs

RFCs that define secure protocols need to reference cryptographic components, or those RFCs define the components themselves.
It is uncommon for IETF protocols to define cryptographic components; instead, those components are defined elsewhere and referenced in the protocol RFC.

There are many sources for cryptographic references for RFCs.

## External References for Specifying Cryptography {#external}

There are many sources of references for cryptography other than RFCs.
Such sources include: 

- National standards development organizations (SDOs) such as the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and the German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI)
- International SDOs such as the International Standards Organization (ISO) and the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
- Academic papers and articles
- Internet Drafts not meant to proceed to RFC status
- Web sites of individual cryptographers

## RFCs for Specifying Cryptography

In order to be published as an RFC, an Internet Draft must be sponsored by one of the following:

- An IETF working group (and then the working group's Area Director)
- A research group in the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF)
- An Area Director who is individually sponsoring the draft
- The Independent Submissions Editor (ISE)
- The Internet Architecture Board (IAB)

RFCs describing cryptographic components have been published by the first four of those.
Note, however, that Area Directors may not be willing to individually sponsor drafts for cryptographic components because other venues for RFC publication can garner better reviews, and because RFCs are often not required for specifying cryptographic components (see {{external}}).
Documents from working groups and those sponsored by Area Directors must get IETF consensus (as determined by the IESG) before publication as RFCs; see {{RFC8789}}.

Many RFCs are specifications of cryptographic components, some are specific use cases of cryptography where additional operational constraints apply, and still others simply list cryptographic identifiers such as OIDs or IANA registration values.

An IETF protocol that uses cryptographic components does not need to refer to RFCs for those components;
it can refer to external references as described in {{external}}.
Whenever possible, cryptographic components related to a specific protocol should be specified separately from the protocol itself.
This allows better review of the cryptography by cryptographers, and better review of the protocol by protocol experts.

## Pitfalls in Requiring RFCs for Cryptographic Components

Some vendors and organizations that specify protocol compliance or interoperability demand that the cryptography used in their requirements be in RFCs.
Such demands are fine for cryptographic components that are already widely agreed upon in IETF working groups, but those demands may not be met due to the difficulty of getting published RFCs for less popular components.
That is, one cannot assume that a cryptographic component can automatically be embodied in an RFC, even if there are no known flaws in the component.

Each of the methods for getting an RFC for cryptographic components has possible failure cases.

IETF working groups:
: Each working group gets to choose which drafts to adopt, based on the working group's charter.
A working group might not adopt a particular draft for a cryptographic component if the working group is already too busy with other work,
or if it finds the new component not different enough from components that have already been specified,
or if it wants the industry to focus on the components that have already been specified.

Research groups IRTF:
: The primary IRTF research group that publishes cryptographic RFCs is the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG).
The CFRG may decide not to publish RFCs for particular cryptographic components if those components are not that different from others that the group have already published,
or if the group decides that the new work might have some undesirable cryptographic properties,
or just because it is so busy with other mor interesting research.

Area Director who individually sponsor drafts:
: Area Directors are usually quite busy running their areas and reviewing every draft that comes before the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG).
They sometimes make special cases for sponsoring drafts, but the amount of work to do so can often be a burden, so they tend not to do so.

The ISE:
: The ISE gets to choose which drafts they spend time on getting published as RFCs.
Each draft that the ISE publishes goes through a lengthy review process before publication, so the ISE tends to be conservative in what they accept to publish.
The ISE publishes on a wide variety of topics, but is often choosy about which drafts within a particular topic (such as cryptography) they publish.

The IAB:
: The IAB publishes drafts that originate with the IAB, and thus does not publish drafts of cryptographic components that were proposed to them.

From the above, it is clear that it is risky to assume that any particular cryptographic component that was not already adopted by a working group or research group will be published as an RFC.
Fortunately, RFC publication is rarely an absolute requirement.
The following section describes how cryptographic components with stable external references can still be specified in ways that protocols can use them: by having them listed in IETF-approved registries maintained by IANA.


# Using Identifiers for Cryptography in Protocols

IETF working groups often produce RFCs that create registries for cryptographic components.
IRTF research groups, particularly the Crypto Forum Research Group (CFRG), also produce RFCs that create registries for cryptographic components.
Cryptographic components that originate in the IRTF can appear in IETF protocols.

Although a proliferation of cryptographic components is a barrier to interoperability, the IETF encourages experimenting with new cryptographic components.
Identifiers used in IETF protocols are meant to be easy to obtain, as the IETF encourages experimentation and operational testing.
These identifiers are often called "code points" when they are listed in IANA registries, but might also be object identifiers (OIDs).
OIDs are covered in {{oids}}.

IANA registries are described in depth in {{RFC8126}}.
The following sections cover aspects of using IANA registries for cryptographic protocols; most of these aspects are the same for non-cryptographic protocols as well.

## Per-Registry Requirements for Adding Code Points

In the past, some working groups allowed only a narrow ability to add cryptographic component code points to IANA registries for their protocols, by requiring an RFC.
Recently, the rules for many registries have been updated to make it easier to get code points.
Registry rules with looser requirement may reduce the likelihood that vendors will just take unallocated codepoints (also known as "squatting") because they can create a stable document for their uses; this also leads to more well-documented experimentation.
While the specific registration conditions for "Expert Review" and "Specification Required" are a matter for the WG to specify when creating or updating a registry, overall IETF policies do not require that these specifications be RFCs; they should, however, be stable references.

Stable specifications are important references for developers who rely on a registry with code points.
Individual web sites are probably the least-used references for cryptographic components for good reasons: the URLs for them might change or disappear, the content of the web sites might change in ways that would affect the components' definition, and so on.

Although there is no IETF-wide consensus at the time of this writing as to whether an Internet Drafts are appropriate for all registries as stable references, they have been used in the past.
Most RFCs do not define whether drafts are acceptable a stable reference, but some do give guidance to designated experts on this topic.

There are some IANA registries where the limited allocation space does not allow for handing out many experimental code points, such as those where the number of code points is limited to 256 or fewer.
This necessitates a more conservative approach to code point allocation, and might instead force experiments to use private use code points instead of having allocations for code points that might only be used occasionally.

## Private-Use Code Points

Every IANA registry for cryptographic components should reserve some code points for "private use".
These private-use code points can be used by protocol implementers to indicate components that do not have their own code points.
Generally, the RFC describing the protocol will define how the private-use code points can be used in practice.

## Vendor Space Code Points

Some IANA registries use an allocation scheme that allows for unlimited code points based on "vendor strings".
This allows for wide experimentation in a "vendor space" that acts as a private-use registration.
Such registrations might later be converted to an allocation not based on vendor names if the cryptographic component achieves IETF-wide consensus.

## Recommendations in IANA Registries

Each IETF working group and IRTF research group gets to specify the rules for the registries for the cryptographic components they create.

A few IANA registries for specific cryptographic protocols have a column with a name such as "status" or "recommended" that indicates whether the the IETF recommends that a cryptographic component be used in that protocol.
Some examples of such registries at the time this document is published are: 

- [TLS Cipher Suites](https://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters/)
There is a "Recommended" column, which is defined in the registry as:
"If an item is not marked as "Recommended", it does not
necessarily mean that it is flawed; rather, it indicates that
the item either has not been through the IETF consensus process,
has limited applicability, or is intended only for specific use
cases."
- [DNS Security Algorithm Numbers](https://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-sec-alg-numbers/)
This registry is being updated by {{I-D.ietf-dnsop-rfc8624-bis}} to indicate whether the algorithm specified in the registry is recommended for signing and/or validation.

\*\* Are there other current registries with cryptographic components that have recommended statuses? \*\*

The idea of keeping recommendations in IANA registries is relatively new, and working groups are experimenting with what types of recommendations will be valuable for implementers and users who are configuring their software to match the recommendations.


## OIDs {#oids}

Some IETF cryptographic protocols (notably CMS, CMP, S/MIME, and PKIX) use OIDs as code points instead of values in IANA registries.
A few IANA registries list OIDs, but currently most OIDs are only listed in RFCs.
OIDs are a hierarchical numbering system, normally stored in ASN.1 DER or BER encoding, and displayed as a series of positive integers separated by period (".") characters.

In IETF standards, many OIDs for cryptographic components normally are based on a part of the OID tree that was established in the early 1990s.
However, many OIDs come from other parts of the OID tree, and no particular part of the OID tree is better or worse than any other for unique identification of cryptographic components.
In fact, individuals who want to control part of the OID tree (called "private enterprise numbers") can get their own OID prefix directly from IANA as described in {{RFC9371}}.
The ASN.1 prefix for the IANA PEN tree is 1.3.6.1.4.1.

There is no definitive central source for OID assignments like the IANA registries.
This means that OIDs that are assigned in RFCs are only visible to readers of those RFCs, which can cause authors of Internet Drafts to accidentally assign OIDs that are already assigned elsewhere.

Assigning OIDs for cryptographic components in RFCs does not have the flexibility and semantic richness available in IANA registries.
Because of this, OIDs are rarely used for cryptographic identifiers in new protocols unless those new protocols are closely aligned with protocols that already use OIDs.

## Identifiers and Intellectual Property

Assigning code points for proprietary cryptographic components or cryptographic components that have known intellectual property rights (IPR) is acceptable as long as any IETF protocol using those code points also allow the protocol to be run without using those components.
The IETF policy on IPR can be found in {{RFC8179}}.

# IANA Considerations

This document contains no actions for IANA.
However, it discusses the use of IANA registries in many places.

# Security Considerations

This document is about the use of cryptography in IETF protocols, and how that cryptography is referenced in those protocols.

Reusing cryptographic components that have already been reviewed and approved in the IETF is usually better than creating new cryptography that must be reviewed before it is used in protocols.

--- back
